---
title: Two of history’s worst software bugs reported to be in medical software
author: Shahid N. Shah
type: post
date: 2005-11-09T00:16:55+00:00
url: /2005/11/09/two-of-historys-worst-software-bugs-reported-to-be-in-medical-software/
oc_commit_id:
  - https://www.healthcareguy.com/2005/11/09/two-of-historys-worst-software-bugs-reported-to-be-in-medical-software/1478768901
views:
  - 650
dsq_thread_id:
  - 5159907985
categories:
  - Opinion

---
Wired magazine&#8217;s [History&#8217;s Worst Software Bugs][1] article shows two of them were created by the medical software community. Getting on this top 10 list is not exactly a badge of honor, but we can certainly learn from the failings of the past.

Wired says the first one occured between 1985 and 1987:

> Therac-25 medical accelerator. A radiation therapy device malfunctions and delivers lethal radiation doses at several medical facilities. Based upon a previous design, the Therac-25 was an &#8220;improved&#8221; therapy system that could deliver two different kinds of radiation: either a low-power electron beam (beta particles) or X-rays. The Therac-25&#8217;s X-rays were generated by smashing high-power electrons into a metal target positioned between the electron gun and the patient. A second &#8220;improvement&#8221; was the replacement of the older Therac-20&#8217;s electromechanical safety interlocks with software control, a decision made because software was perceived to be more reliable.
> 
> What engineers didn&#8217;t know was that both the 20 and the 25 were built upon an operating system that had been kludged together by a programmer with no formal training. Because of a subtle bug called a &#8220;race condition,&#8221; a quick-fingered typist could accidentally configure the Therac-25 so the electron beam would fire in high-power mode but with the metal X-ray target out of position. At least five patients die; others are seriously injured. 

Wired says the second one occured just five years ago:

> National Cancer Institute, Panama City. In a series of accidents, therapy planning software created by Multidata Systems International, a U.S. firm, miscalculates the proper dosage of radiation for patients undergoing radiation therapy.
> 
> Multidata&#8217;s software allows a radiation therapist to draw on a computer screen the placement of metal shields called &#8220;blocks&#8221; designed to protect healthy tissue from the radiation. But the software will only allow technicians to use four shielding blocks, and the Panamanian doctors wish to use five.
> 
> The doctors discover that they can trick the software by drawing all five blocks as a single large block with a hole in the middle. What the doctors don&#8217;t realize is that the Multidata software gives different answers in this configuration depending on how the hole is drawn: draw it in one direction and the correct dose is calculated, draw in another direction and the software recommends twice the necessary exposure.
> 
> At least eight patients die, while another 20 receive overdoses likely to cause significant health problems. The physicians, who were legally required to double-check the computer&#8217;s calculations by hand, are indicted for murder. 

Don&#8217;t think these bugs rank in the top 10? Got others that might be worse? [Send me an email about it][2].

 [1]: http://wired.com/news/technology/bugs/0,2924,69355,00.html
 [2]: mailto:shahid@shah.org