---
title: Salara
author: Shahid N. Shah
type: post
date: 2005-12-14T14:57:51+00:00
draft: true
url: '?p=123&preview=true&preview_id=123'
categories:
  - Opinion

---
6 year old company in Baltimore. 10 people. 5 engineers, 1 ops, rest imple

* IT solutions for mobile physicians in the USA, CDC work in Africa for HIV treatment (clinicians must know what drugs they are on &#8211; Zambia 80% have no electricity, water). Low power smart-card based portable EMR solution. Fascinating to work on
  
* Handheld, mobile, wireless solutions &#8212; medical reference by physicians at JH
  
* Trying to get into the clinical process issues. 99% of hospitals have dictation and transcription for notes for in patient

* 3 years ago Salara looked at tablets &#8212; mimics paper. Johns Hopkins and Univ of Pittsburg docs are collaborating about patient care. Seen improvements in quality of care, tangible results for time saving, revenue impacts for hospitals. How was it measured? Hospitals rely on physician documentation for revenue (wierd since docs are customers of hospital).

* Approach is to not change the way the doctor does business. Notes look just like the forms that they enter in paper format. Collaboration is the big deal. Labs, etc is connected to the notes. Works in a disconnected manner. Write in the note or type in the notes. Handwriting recogniztion is not good enough (works in context like numbers, etc). Dictionation system (Voice recog) is not good either.

SQL*Server, .NET, Java interface engine

PDAs are frustrating for data entry, good for reading. Specialty medicine for click-through documentation works.

* Compliance+ is not attempting to be the EMR
  
* Fast or faster than paper including collaboration &#8212; worst case is that it&#8217;s break even