---
title: Network-centric computing model to overcome centralized database limitations
author: Shahid N. Shah
type: post
date: 2006-01-26T04:01:06+00:00
draft: true
url: '?p=187&preview=true&preview_id=187'
categories:
  - Opinion

---
Today’s embedded systems are becoming increasingly complex. Applications are becoming more distributed, and individual nodes on the network are becoming ever more heterogeneous. Many nodes will have real-time and dynamically changing requirements, while other nodes will be connecting to distributed databases through web services or other standard interfaces.

The commonly accepted approach to large-scale data management is to use a database. However, when dealing with these modern network-centric systems, the client-server model approach fails to deliver remote access to data in a real-time (i.e. deterministic) manner.

A new approach is needed, one that provides localized management of the data as part of the real-time distributed network, rather than trying to fit the client-server DBMS to serve a different type of computing model. In order to deal with these issues, the network-centric computing model is increasingly being adopted.

This paper provides an overview of the network-centric computing model, data distribution services, and distributed data management. It then describes how the SkyBoard™ integration and synchronization service, coupled with an implementation of the OMG’s Data Distribution Service (DDS) standard, can be used to create an efficient data distribution, storage, and retrieval system.

Interested in reading the full paper from Real-Time Innovations? Download Data Management for Real-Time Distributed Systems at www.rti.com/mk/rtc06paper.html.

NOTE: This &#8220;Data Management for Real-Time Distributed Systems.pdf&#8221; document is stored in shared/Documents