---
title: Social EMRs/EHRs and why RECs and ARRA will delay those innovations
author: Shahid N. Shah
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: '?p=925&preview=true&preview_id=925'
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
I&#8217;ve written and spoken recently about my fear that the stimulus bill has actually reduced innovative activity in healthcare IT (_not stimulated it_) and that the regional extension centers program (RECs) is likely to wreck innovation further. The government has long believed in comparative medicine and that it doesn&#8217;t get the kind of data it needs to help reduce healthcare costs; so, the government wanted to use its size and our tax dollars to try and stimulate hospitals and doctors to buy technology and systems that they saw no benefit in doing on their own.

The assumption was that the lack of EMRs and EHRs in the marketplace was directly due to misunderstanding the value of those systems and that hospitals and physicians just didn&#8217;t have the money to &#8220;do the right thing&#8221;. Once hospitals and docs had the money they would run out and buy the tech and start using it to create interoperable data and start sharing the data with the government and insurance plans so that all that great data could be used to improve care and reduce costs.

While this _sounds_ like a good plan, it&#8217;s is of course not going to work. The EMR/EHR products and market that the government wants to prop up wasn&#8217;t working before and will not be any better after intrusive intervention. If they were great to begin with, the government wouldn&#8217;t need to tell customers to buy them. What we need are not the large, monolithic, impossible to use, difficult to install, and most of all _isolated_ EMRs. What we need are social EMRs and social EHRs that understand that the patient, not the doctor or the hospital, are at the heart of systems. EMRs are ultimately a cross between ERPs and CRMs and such are glorified patient relationship management (PRM) systems.

Social EMRs would allow patients to register online and automatically have their demographics entered in the EMR that the doctor would get to see during the visit. Social EMRs would allow the patient&#8217;s to use their cell phones to request appointments; they would allow doctors to share lab results and notes with referring physicians through a secure email system